---
date: 2026-03-19
tags:
  - javascript
  - backend
---
**REST** is not a protocol, format, or strict rulebook.  It is just some guiding principles, specifically 3 guys.

1. **Stateless communication** - Each request has to be independent and has all the information the server needs
2. **Resource-based structure** - Data and functions are organized into direct resources each with their own route
3. **Use of HTTP methods** - Standard HTTP guys to indicate the routes for resources

Data is presented as **CRUD** operations:
1. **C**reate a resource (POST)
2. **R**ead a resource (GET)
3. **U**pdate a resource (PUT or PATCH)
4. **D**elete a resource (DELETE

There are **6** architectural constraints to **REST**.
1. **Client-Server**.  The server stores data, rules, logic and provides information while the client makes requests to the server and does something useful with the responses.  They see each other as black boxes
2. **Stateless**.  In **REST**, each request from the client is independent.  This means that the server doesn't keep any memory from any request.
3. **Cacheable**.  In **REST**, the server explicitly states if requests are cacheable using HTTP headers like `Cache-Control` or `Expires`.  If a response is cacheable the server gets to specify for how long its valid.
4. **Uniform interface**.  Uses a uniform interface to ensure consistent communication between clients and servers.  
	- While each resource may be dynamically generated by the server, each resource must be uniquely identifiable by a URL that remains constant for its lifetime.  Urls are usually nouns, not verbs.
	- The client interacts with information about the resource, not the resource itself.  This means the client doesn't need to know how the server stores stuff or how it manipulates objects, it just needs to know what the resulting **JSON representation** will look like.
5. **Self-descriptive messages**.  Every response and request should contain enough information to be understood by itself.
6. Hypermedia As The Engine Of Application State (**HATEOAS**).  In the server, hypermedia links are like signposts, the client doesn't need to know all the URLs in advance, it can follow links provided by the server and learn the routes dynamically.
7. The server can be made up of **multiple layers**, but the client can still treat them all as one whole.  Some examples include **caching layers**, **authentication layer**, **load balancing layer**. 
8. **Code on demand**.  The server can optionally send javascript code to update the clients behaviour on the fly!

When creating a **REST** system, avoid verbs, use lowercase and hyphens, and map HTTP verbs to CRUD operations.  Represent parent-child relationships directly in the URL.  Use query parameters for filtering, sorting, and searching.

Steps to designing a **REST**ful API:
1. Identify the resources
	1. Real world objects (users, products, vehicles)
	2. Digital items (images, reviews, songs)
	3. Abstract concepts (orders, sessions, transactions)
	4. System resources (settings, logs, metrics)
2. Identify the attributes for each resource
3. Come up with our endpoints
	1. Use consistent, predictable names
	2. User plural nouns in route paths in like a collection www.com/users
	3. Add a unique identifier for individual guys www.com/users/12345
	4. Put parent child relationships directly in the url www.com/users/12345/products
	5. lowercase letters and hyphens for multi word resources
	6. Map HTTP verbs to CRUD operations
	7. Use *query params* for filtering, sorting, and searching
	8. **Don't put filter logic in the path!!!**
4. Use pagination
	1. Number of resources with stuff like **limit** and **pageSize**
	2. The number of the page to retrieve with **page**
	3. OR another option is a **start** and **end** range of results
	4. These go in the *query params*
